---
title: "Bitcoin"
date: 2019-09-11T20:41:42+01:00
lastmod: 2019-09-11T20:41:42+01:00
draft: false
description: ""
weight: 220
---


In this section, relevant episodes from the scaling debate in Bitcoin's history are revisited in light of the above framework. It should be noted that these episodes occurred as the resolution of a conflict within the Bitcoin community about how to scale which had persisted for years. The two sides in this conflict can be broadly construed as those who wanted to scale on chain (with bigger blocks) and those who wanted to scale off chain with "layer 2" solutions like [Lightning Network](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lightning_Network):

* The UASF [episode](https://medium.com/@jimmysong/bitcoin-uasf-and-skin-in-the-game-7695031c5689) demonstrated that Bitcoin's PoW miners do not have unilateral power to veto changes to the consensus rules. The fact that a range of actors in the Bitcoin ecosystem were willing to support splitting the chain, a risky and potentially chaotic move, demonstrates that PoW miners have *some power* to veto changes to the consensus rules which they dislike. In the case of SegWit activation, the miners backed down, indicating that they did not collectively feel strongly enough about SegWit to risk the disruption and damage of a UASF chain split. The UASF side won the game of brinksmanship in this case and did not have to follow through on their threat to fork non-cooperating miners on to their own chain - but it is not clear how the scenario would have played out if the UASF actually went ahead. Without enough mining power or an emergency difficulty adjustment the "BTC forced SegWit" chain would have progressed slowly for a time. If it commanded a price premium relative to the BTC non-SegWit chain then miners may have defected to collect its larger rewards.
* The BCH hard fork and chain split was constructed as a way for a segment of PoW hashing power and ecosystem actors to exit the main Bitcoin chain and strike out on their own. Bitmain, the dominant producer of ASICs and controller of Bitcoin hashpower, was instrumental in establishing BCH. By establishing BCH as a hard fork which was clearly differentiated from the Bitcoin chain, this approach likely caused less disruption than the UASF would have done. The BCH hard fork also incorporated an "emergency difficulty adjustment" that allowed the chain to progress with significantly less mining power, by updating the difficulty more frequently and drastically. The creation of a forked chain which could persist over time introduced the market as a key force which would determine the eventual winner. Bitmain stimulated demand for BCH by accepting it as payment for ASICs while rejecting BTC, and some other BCH supporting economic actors did likewise. In general though the PoW miners followed the economic incentives and collectively balanced their hashpower between the BTC and BCH chains in whichever way was most profitable for them, following price fluctuations closely. While miners have autonomy they also have costs to cover, and if the market determines that one chain's assets are worth significantly less then it will not be able to support as many miners, lowering its security. 
* The SegWit2x hard fork was proposed by a group of 58 companies in the Bitcoin ecosystem in what came to be known as the [New York Agreement](https://medium.com/@DCGco/bitcoin-scaling-agreement-at-consensus-2017-133521fe9a77). This agreement followed a meeting at Consensus in 2017, and much of the opposition which would be voiced focused on the fact that it came from a private meeting which most participants in the Bitcoin ecosystem could not attend, and which was not recorded. It quickly became clear that the SegWit2x fork would be contentious, with enough people opposing it to likely result in a chain split. SegWit2x was [abandoned](https://lists.linuxfoundation.org/pipermail/bitcoin-SegWit2x/2017-November/000685.html) by its main supporters days before it was due to activate, citing lack of support within the Bitcoin ecosystem. The weeks and months leading up to this activation date saw significant volumes of often vitriolic opposition to SegWit2x voiced on social media platforms, and also the trading of 2x and no-2x futures on a variety of exchanges (SegWit2x futures had been [trading](https://news.bitcoin.com/SegWit2x-futures-continue-to-trade-despite-fork-cancellation/) at $1,300 or around 20% of the BTC price). 

Each of these (prospective) chain splits required software to be written which would implement the changes that cause the split. Furthermore, each prospective diverging chain would need its own group of developers who could maintain and enhance the software. 

The ultimate failure of the SegWit2x fork occurred not when it was abandoned by its main supporters, but when the small number of actors who tried to launch it anyway found their nodes [stuck](https://www.coindesk.com/no-fork-no-fire-SegWit2x-nodes-stall-running-abandoned-bitcoin-code) on the block before the fork was supposed to activate, due to a bug in their code. Another demonstration that skilled and dedicated developers are a necessary part of any plan to fork (or found) a blockchain. 

The BCH chain went on to split again and form BSV, then encountered some [bugs](https://cryptovest.com/news/bitcoin-cash-bch-chain-underwent-rogue-fork-due-to-normal-bugs/) of its own that caused disruption around a planned hard fork upgrade. It also seems that the dominant BCH miners were able to [coordinate](https://bravenewcoin.com/insights/the-bitcoin-cash-fiasco-a-reorg-or-a-51-percent-attack) a double spend attack while this was happening. 

When a fork occurs that results in two chains that share the same hash function, miners can switch between these at will but must at any given moment in time decide which chain to mine on. The chain with minority hashpower in this scenario is more vulnerable to attack because miners who rely on the dominant chain for their income do not have such a vested interest in the health of the network with lesser value. Where opportunities arise to extract profit for the miner at the expense of the network's health, these are more likely to be taken when the miner can make a low friction exit to mine a different chain without suffering economic consequences. GPU mined coins also suffer from this effect generally. 

This [article](https://medium.com/@nic__carter/its-the-settlement-assurances-stupid-5dcd1c3f4e41) by Nic Carter considers this weakness from the perspective of final settlement, or knowing when a transaction has enough confirmations to be considered irreversible. Carter concludes that GPU mined chains can only provide weak assurance that a transaction will not be reversed because it is always possible that significantly more hashpower could be added to the network and the chain could suffer a deep reorg. Blockchains mined with ASICs have a much lower limit on the amount of additional hashpower that could be deployed on the network.

Developer groups must also choose which side of a chain split to join, and for developers this may be a high friction decision where it becomes difficult to switch to work on software for the other chain. 

The Bitcoin Core group of developers, whose software is used by 97% of the Bitcoin public nodes, were as a collective on the "winning" side in each of these episodes. It is not clear from the outside whether Bitcoin Core lost contributors who went to work on software that was supporting a different chain.

In the case of a chain split, holders of the asset have an equal number of units on each chain, and now have a choice about which one to use. From a technical perspective, users are not compelled to pick a side. As long as precautions are taken to make transactions incompatible between chains (to avoid [replay attacks](https://blockonomi.com/replay-attacks/)), users should only be exposed to damage from a chain split to the extent that the two split chains are weaker than the former sum of their parts. Nevertheless, the Bitcoin community did appear to fragment as a result of the episodes described above, with many members announcing their preferred fork and becoming hostile to supporters of the other variants.

Exchanges have some work to do to accommodate the existence of a newly split chain and ensure that their systems handle it appropriately - but they also stand to benefit from collecting trading fees on markets that allow the assets (or futures) to be traded against each other. 

The Bitcoin Core developers conduct a significant degree of deliberation about the project in public spaces like mailing lists, GitHub, and logged IRC channels - and as with most FOSS projects the work itself and coordination around it happens quite openly. Discussions about these decisions percolate out into social media more broadly (blogs, twitter, reddit), where a more diverse array of ecosystem participants make their perspectives known. This kind of public review process is integral to Bitcoin, as can be seen in the rejection of SegWit2x based in some part on how the proposal originated from a closed meeting. Due to its CBPP roots, Bitcoin has a degree of transparency in its governance that far surpasses any other organizational form producing a public resource on this scale - thinking here about private corporations, non profits, government departments and central banks.

Bitcoin's governance is largely informal, as with many CBPP projects. There is however a commonly accepted method of tracking proposed changes to the software - [Bitcoin Improvement Proposals (BIPs)](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips). I have written about this approach [elsewhere](https://medium.com/@richardred/a-users-perspective-and-introduction-to-blockchain-governance-80fbe2050222) and won't repeat it here, suffice it to say that there is considerable discretion on the part of key contributors in determining whether a BIP advances.

Bitcoin Core contributors also communicate in publicly accessible mailing lists, in IRC chat rooms (with weekly meetings that are [logged and summarized](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/issues)), and on the [Issues](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/issues) and [Pull Requests](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pulls) of the Bitcoin GitHub repositories. 

As the network grows in significance, the stakes get higher - strategic decisions about the Bitcoin Core software are arguably the most important of any FOSS project. The lack of formal governance means that resolving disputes can be a long drawn out affair, as ad hoc signalling mechanisms may produce conflicting signals and are all susceptible to manipulation. 

* Resources
  * Jameson Lopp's [Bitcoin resources page](https://www.lopp.net/bitcoin-information.html)
  * Hasu's [Unpacking Bitcoin's Social Contract](https://medium.com/s/story/bitcoins-social-contract-1f8b05ee24a9)

